---
title: "Ideas of things to write about."
date: 2026-01-01
draft: true
---

## Go Code

- stacktrace
- errcontext
- logger with error handling
- retry package using errclass
- task manager

## Other Code

- SQL forest (parental links vs table options)

## Code Adjacent

- Productionalizing a public library (series?)
- docker bake?
- github actions?
- modulo bias for random numbers
- metrics/logs/telemetry
- Data pipelines. Kafka vs NATS Jetstream

## Other

- https://www.engineeringladders.com/ (https://unlearned.github.io/engineeringladders/)
- Coding interviews
  - Recent Experiences:
    - Leet code practice; got exact question I was looking at earlier that day [1679. Max Number of K-Sum Pairs](https://leetcode.com/problems/max-number-of-k-sum-pairs/description)
    - Standard DS; k-top market caps of symbol, and direct symbol lookup (both map and slice)
    - Standard DS; Mock filesystem (linked list, organizing data storage, etc)
    - Terrible: `func(balances []int, requests []string) int[]` with values representing 1-indexed. Super odd error handling. Dumb questions about what you would do differently in a real env.
    - Terrible: fix this code by changing only one line, but the code is the worst written crap ever. Like every odd esoteric language feature. The problem was swapped params.
    - Build w AI: make a CLI that commands a robot
    - Build w AI: make a CLI Mastermind game
  - Past problems:
    - Counting Lakes
    - Matrix set zeros
  - Classics:
    - FizzBuzz
    - Matching brackets
  - Beware of Malware: take home test
  - General:
    - How enjoyable is the experience for the candidate? For the interviewer?
    - What are you hoping to learn about the candidate?
    - How constrained is the problem space? Is that a good or a bad thing?
    - How would you expect a jr vs a sr dev to handle it differently, if at all?
    - Is the question recycled often? How to trade off between consistent feedback and risk of leaked questions?
    - Environment:
      - Screen share own env
      - Google Doc
      - CoderPad
      - CodeSignal (like LeetCode has pre-created test cases; website is touting AI interviewers?)
- Book reviews?
- Tool reviews?
- War Stories:
  - zenreach email issue
  - zircuit code vandalism
