---
title: "Extended Error Use Case: errclass"
date: 2026-02-13
description: "Introducing errclass, a concrete use cass for the generic error wrapper created previously."
summary: "Let's build the errclass pacakge on top of the generic error wrapper created previously."
tags: ["golang"]
series: ["Go Error Handling"]
series_order: 2
draft: true
---

## Recap

In the previous article in this series, we created a generic error wrapper that allowed us to attach type-safe data to another error.

The important parts we will need to reference are:

```go
package xerrors

type ExtendedError[T any] struct {
    err  error
    Data T
}

func Extend[T any](data T, err error) error { ... }
func Extract[T any](err error) (T, bool) { ... }

```

In this article, we will explore and implement one concrete use case that makes use of this wrapper.

## Use Case: Error Classification

One of the simplest use cases I had was to allow for marking errors as belonging to a particular class.

### Problem Description

Consider that you make an SQL query to an external database, or perhaps a POST call to a REST API. What happens when you get an error back? Should you retry the call? Is the problem a temporary network issue, or was there something wrong with your inputs?

There's no magic way to determine this - you need to know the details of your specific situation. On the other hand, if you do need to retry in some cases (and not others), you might find yourself writing a retry func that is now tightly coupled to this particular call. How can we decouple?

### Ideal Solution

As a developer, it would be nice to be able to write something like:

```go
switch errType(err) {
case type1, type2, type3:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Transient)
case type4, type5:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Persistent)
default:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Unknown)
}
```

Then have a retry library that doesn't need to know anything about the error types from our caller:

```go
func Try(f func() error) error {
retryLoop:
    for /* some conditions */{
        err := f()
        switch errclass.GetClass(err) {
        case errclass.Nil:
            cause = Success
            break retryLoop
        case errclass.Persistent:
            cause = PersistentErrorEncountered
            break retryLoop
        }
        // delay until next retry
    }
    // return appropriately based on cause
}
```

## Introducing The `errClass` Package

Let's make this a reality. First we need to decide what classes of error we want to support. We could skip type-safety and make these definable later, but that's likely to lead to more trouble down the line. From our example above, we already have `Nil`, `Transient`, `Persistent` and the catch-all `Unknown`. I'm going to add `Panic` to that list, but we won't make use of that just now (that's for a future article).

You might ask: _"Why `Nil`?"_

The answer is right there in the example `Try` function: I'd like to have a `switch errclass.GetClass(err)` and unless I make the class types pointers, then we will need a class to represent a lack of error.

```go
type Class int

const (
    Nil Class = iota - 1 // start at -1
    Unknown
    Transient
    Persistent
    Panic
)
```

It is generally best practice to make catch-all values such as our `Unknown` be associated with a zero-value. Since I want to have the actual values be comparable from least to most concerning, I've set `Nil` lower than `Unknown` and given it a `-1`.

Add some helpers for human readability:

```go
func (c Class) String() string {
    switch c {
    case Nil:
        return "nil"
    case Panic:
        return "panic"
    case Transient:
        return "transient"
    case Persistent:
        return "persistent"
    default:
        return "unknown"
    }
}

func (c Class) LogValue() slog.Value {
    return slog.GroupValue(
        slog.String("class", c.String()),
    )
}
```

And now we actually leverage our previous work to implement `WrapAs` and `GetClass`:

```go
func WrapAs(err error, class Class) error {
    if err == nil {
        return nil
    }
    return xerrors.Extend(class, err)
}

func GetClass(err error) Class {
    if err == nil {
        return Nil
    }
    if class, ok := xerrors.Extract[Class](err); ok {
        return class
    }
    return Unknown
}
```

### Gotcha: Error Wrapping Chain

One of the interesting side-effects of the error wrapper is that errors can be wrapped multiple times, even with the same type of wrapper. Consider this:

```go
func foo() error {
    if err := bar(); err != nil {
        return errclass.WrapAs(err, errclass.Transient)
    }
    return nil
}

func bar() error {
    return errclass.WrapAs(errSentinel, errclass.Persistent)
}
```

What class of error is the one returned by `foo()`? What class should it be?

The answer to the first question is easy: `Transient`. This is because that's the outer-most instance of `ExtendedError[errclass.Class]`. The other instance is still present and accessible via `errclass.GetClass(errors.Unwrap(foo())`, but one would have to know it exists in order to find it.

The second question is more difficult as the answer depends on one's philosophy. Who should make the determination? Should an error class even be allowed to be overridden? Should overrides only be allowed when the severity is increased?

I would argue that the writer of any given code should always be the authority on what they want that code to do. As a library, the `errclass` package should only serve to make it easier for the author to do what they want. It absolutely should not impose the library author's philosophy on others. With that in mind, the best solution here is to allow flexibility in our API.

<!-- TODO -->

### Gotcha: Joined Errors
