---
title: "Extended Error Use Case: errclass"
date: 2026-02-20
description: "Introducing errclass, a concrete use case for the generic error wrapper created previously."
summary: "Let's build the errclass package on top of the generic error wrapper created previously."
tags: ["golang"]
series: ["Go Error Handling"]
series_order: 2
draft: false
---

## Recap

In the previous article in this series, we created a generic error wrapper that allowed us to attach type-safe data to another error.

The important parts we will need to reference are:

```go
package xerrors

type ExtendedError[T any] struct {
    err  error
    Data T
}

func Extend[T any](data T, err error) error { ... }
func Extract[T any](err error) (T, bool) { ... }

```

In this article, we will explore and implement one concrete use case that makes use of this wrapper.

## Use Case: Error Classification

One of the simplest use cases I had was to allow for marking errors as belonging to a particular classification of errors.

### Problem Description

Consider that you make an SQL query to an external database, or perhaps a POST call to a REST API. What happens when you get an error back? Should you retry the call? Is the problem a temporary network issue, or was there something wrong with your inputs?

There's no magic way to determine this - you need to know the details of your specific situation. On the other hand, if you do need to retry in some cases (and not others), you might find yourself writing a retry func that is now tightly coupled to this particular call. How can we decouple?

### Ideal Solution

As a developer, it would be nice to be able to write something like:

```go
switch errType(err) {
case type1, type2, type3:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Transient)
case type4, type5:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Persistent)
default:
    return errClass.WrapAs(err, errClass.Unknown)
}
```

Then have a retry library that doesn't need to know anything about the error types from our caller:

```go
func Try(f func() error) error {
retryLoop:
    for /* some conditions */{
        err := f()
        switch errclass.GetClass(err) {
        case errclass.Nil:
            cause = Success
            break retryLoop
        case errclass.Persistent:
            cause = PersistentErrorEncountered
            break retryLoop
        }
        // delay until next retry
    }
    // return appropriately based on cause
}
```

## Introducing The `errClass` Package

Let's make this a reality. First we need to decide what classes of error we want to support. We could skip type-safety and make these definable later, but that's likely to lead to more trouble down the line. From our example above, we already have `Nil`, `Transient`, `Persistent` and the catch-all `Unknown`. I'm going to add `Panic` to that list, but we won't make use of that just now (that's for a future article).

You might ask: _"Why `Nil`?"_

The answer is right there in the example `Try` function: I'd like to have a `switch errclass.GetClass(err)` and unless I make the class types pointers, then we will need a class to represent a lack of error.

```go
type Class int

const (
    Nil Class = iota - 1 // start at -1
    Unknown
    Transient
    Persistent
    Panic
)
```

It is generally best practice to make catch-all values such as our `Unknown` be associated with a zero-value. Since I want to have the actual values be comparable from least to most concerning, I've set `Nil` lower than `Unknown` and given it a `-1`.

Add some helpers for human readability:

```go
func (c Class) String() string {
    switch c {
    case Nil:
        return "nil"
    case Panic:
        return "panic"
    case Transient:
        return "transient"
    case Persistent:
        return "persistent"
    default:
        return "unknown"
    }
}

func (c Class) LogValue() slog.Value {
    return slog.GroupValue(
        slog.String("class", c.String()),
    )
}
```

And now we actually leverage our previous work to implement `WrapAs` and `GetClass`:

```go
func WrapAs(err error, class Class) error {
    if err == nil {
        return nil
    }
    return xerrors.Extend(class, err)
}

func GetClass(err error) Class {
    if err == nil {
        return Nil
    }
    if class, ok := xerrors.Extract[Class](err); ok {
        return class
    }
    return Unknown
}
```

### Gotcha: Error Wrapping Chain

One of the interesting side-effects of the error wrapper is that errors can be wrapped multiple times, even with the same type of wrapper. Consider this:

```go
func foo() error {
    if err := bar(); err != nil {
        return errclass.WrapAs(err, errclass.Transient)
    }
    return nil
}

func bar() error {
    return errclass.WrapAs(errSentinel, errclass.Persistent)
}
```

What class of error is the one returned by `foo()`? What class should it be?

The answer to the first question is easy: `Transient`. This is because that's the outer-most instance of `ExtendedError[errclass.Class]`. The other instance is still present and accessible via `errclass.GetClass(errors.Unwrap(foo())`, but one would have to know it exists in order to find it.

The second question is more difficult as the answer depends on one's philosophy. Who should make the determination? Should an error class even be allowed to be overridden? Should overrides only be allowed when the severity is increased?

I would argue that the writer of any given code should always be the authority on what they want that code to do. As a library, the `errclass` package should only serve to make it easier for the author to do what they want. It absolutely should not impose the library author's philosophy on others. With that in mind, the best solution here is to allow flexibility in our API.

There are a few ways we could do this. If our library was already in use then changing the API would be a _bad idea_. In this case it isn't but I think the best solution here does not change the API anyway. Let's use the functional options pattern to add options to the existing `WrapAs()` func.

{{< alert "lightbulb" >}}
Learn more about the functional options pattern from [this book](https://100go.co/#not-using-the-functional-options-pattern-11) I highly recommend.
{{< /alert >}}

Let's offer 3 ways to wrap the error with a class:

1. Always add the new class wrapping (default, and current behavior)
2. Only add a class wrapping if the error isn't already wrapped (ie the errclass is `Unknown`)
3. Only add a class wrapping if the new class is a higher severity than the existing class

#### Functional Options Boilerplate

```go
type wrappingRestriction int

const (
    wrappingRestrictionNone wrappingRestriction = iota
    wrappingRestrictionOnlyUnknown
    wrappingRestrictionOnlyMoreSevere
)

type wrapOptions struct {
    restriction wrappingRestriction
}

type WrapOption func(opt *wrapOptions)
```

#### The Options funcs

```go
func WithUnrestricted() WrapOption {
    return func(opt *wrapOptions) {
        opt.restriction = wrappingRestrictionNone
    }
}

func WithOnlyUnknown() WrapOption {
    return func(opt *wrapOptions) {
        opt.restriction = wrappingRestrictionOnlyUnknown
    }
}

func WithOnlyMoreSevere() WrapOption {
    return func(opt *wrapOptions) {
        opt.restriction = wrappingRestrictionOnlyMoreSevere
    }
}
```

#### Finally, the new `WrapAs` func

```go
func WrapAs(err error, class Class, opts ...WrapOption) error {
    if err == nil {
        return nil
    }

    // Apply options
    options := wrapOptions{}
    for _, opt := range opts {
        opt(&options)
    }

    currentClass := GetClass(err)
    switch options.restriction {
    case wrappingRestrictionOnlyUnknown:
        if currentClass == Unknown {
            return xerrors.Extend(class, err)
        }
        return err

    case wrappingRestrictionOnlyMoreSevere:
        if class > currentClass {
            return xerrors.Extend(class, err)
        }
        return err

    default:
        return xerrors.Extend(class, err)
    }
}
```

Admittedly, the functional options pattern creates rather verbose code for what it does. However the benefit of the variadic parameter is that if there was already code that called the old `WrapAs(error, Class)` signature, it would still work. In fact, it would work in _exactly_ the same way since we have chosen the default behavior to match our previous behavior. Note that if `WrapAs` was a receiver func, then this does change the signature, which would affect any interfaces - however that is not the case here.

### Gotcha: Joined Errors

{{< alert >}}
This applies to the `xerrors` package and **all** subpackages, not just `errclass`.
{{< /alert >}}

I wanted to talk about this in the previous article, but decided it would make more sense in the context of a concrete implementation like this one.

Using [errors.Join](https://pkg.go.dev/errors#example-Join) with our ExtendedError (and thus all packages that use it, like the errclass package) will result in a less-than-ideal outcome. The problem here is that `errors.Join` returns the internal type `*errors.joinError` which does not implement `slog.LogValuer` ([source code](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.26.0:src/errors/join.go)).

Even if it _did_ implement `slog.LogValuer`, this would open a whole new can of worms for us, as now we would need to support an error tree, and not just an error chain. That is a much harder problem than it appears.

Consider this "simple" `Unjoin()` func:

```go
func Unjoin(err error, recursive bool) []error {
    if err == nil {
        return nil
    }
    joined, ok := err.(interface{ Unwrap() []error })
    if !ok {
        return []error{err}
    }
    if !recursive {
        return joined.Unwrap()
    }
    var result []error
    for _, child := range joined.Unwrap() {
        result = append(result, Unjoin(child, true)...)
    }
    return result
}
```

At first glance, this does what we would need in order to start building out support. Unfortunately, this code is incorrect. Consider this:

```go
err := xerrors.Extend(data, errors.Join(err1, err2))
```

If you call `Unjoin(err)` here, it would return only `[]errors{err}` since `ExtendedError[data]` does not implement `Unwrap() []error`. Even if it did, and we got `[]errors{err1, err2}` as intended, that result is now missing the `data` that was added to the outer joined error.

Like I said, it's complicated.

The good news is that (in my experience) `errors.Join` is seldom used. The bad news is we are trying to create a library that could be used by anyone in any way - including these odd-looking edge-cases.

For now at least, I'm going to accept that we don't properly support joined errors.

## Next Steps

The complete code for our errclass package can be found at [github.com/wood-jp/xerrors/errclass](https://github.com/wood-jp/xerrors/tree/main/errclass). Note that the code will likely differ from what was presented here as it is expanded and improved over time.

### Related Reading

- [100 Go Mistakes and How to Avoid Them](https://100go.co/)
- [`errors.Join` Source Code](https://cs.opensource.google/go/go/+/refs/tags/go1.26.0:src/errors/join.go)

---

_Some code in this article is based on work from [zkr-go-common](https://github.com/zircuit-labs/zkr-go-common-public), licensed under the MIT License, originally authored by [wood-jp](https://github.com/wood-jp) at [Zircuit](https://www.zircuit.com/)
