---
title: "Typical First Post"
date: 2026-01-25
description: "An introduction to this blog and what you can expect to find here."
summary: "Welcome to my blog. As is tradition, this first post talks about the intent of the blog as a whole."
tags: ["meta"]
draft: false
---

## Welcome

Hey, you found me! Welcome to my blog. As is tradition, in this first post I'll attempt to set the stage for the rest of the blog in terms of what I plan to do with it, and why you should care to read any of it.

I have been a professional software developer since 2014, and I have managed to form some thoughts and opinions over time that I'd like to share with a broader audience. These ideas are not limited strictly to the writing of code, but will be at least tangentially related. This isn't going to be a personal journal - I sincerely hope that beyond this particular post each and every article I write here provides readers with tangible value.

I have always been a backend developer, so don't expect much front-end stuff from me. My primary language for many years now has been Go, so expect to see a lot of that. However I don't want this blog to be only about code. I also want to touch on process, roles, hiring, tools, and all the other fun stuff that comes with the real world of software development.

## Why Now?

I have wanted to write this blog for several years, but many of the concrete bits of code that I wanted to talk about were proprietary. Recently however, Zircuit open-sourced their code (ironically _I_ was the developer responsible for making that happen), which allows for me to finally fork and discuss a lot of code that I wrote.

Zircuit has since also decided to terminate the development of their L2 blockchain, which has suddenly provided me with extra free time. I don't expect to be out of work for long, but I might as well take advantage.
